[Music]
you know airplanes are mysterious things
unimaginably heavy-metal giant soaring
through the sky jam-packed with not only
people but also all kinds of electronic
gizmos and overhead bins stuffed with
their oversized luggage and perhaps
children no not really
what confuses me the most however is the
airplanes tires yeah really I mean look
at them compared to the planes body
they're tiny how can they withstand all
that weight and speed okay let's check
out what's happening when a plane is
preparing to land on the runway while
still in the air its speed is becoming
lower and lower and that's when you
might feel your ears getting congested
you also sense that the plane has
seemingly started crawling at a snail's
pace
when just a second ago it was moving at
breakneck speed in their flight deck the
pilots are slowing the plane down even
more and getting ready to lower the
landing gear which is often called the
undercarriage that's a complex mechanism
that consists of structural components
energy absorbers brakes hydraulics and
of course the wheels and tires from your
seat you can hear a distinct robotic
noise fits the landing gear and wing
flaps being lowered then when the
airplane is about to land its nose
starts pointing upward now if that seems
counterintuitive think about water skis
when a skier is moving across the water
surface their skis are always inclined
upward otherwise both the skier and the
skis would go under the water the same
approach goes for airplanes pilots must
point the aircraft nose toward the sky
just before landing so that they don't
stall the Machine plus exposing all that
large surface area on the wings and
belly will help slow the speed of
descent anyway several seconds later all
300 tons of your airplane touched the
ground while still going 170 miles per
hour
imagine your typical two-story house
fully furnished dropping to the ground
as fast as a flying arrow that must be
quite an impact and still those tiny
comparatively little tires
don't hop under the tremendous pressure
this incredible feat has to do with the
materials airplane tires are made of the
gas that fills these tires and the way
they're inflated to make an airplane
tire producers use a mix of different
kinds of synthetic rubber
it makes aircraft tire so strong that
each of them can easily deal with a
thirty-eight ton load um didn't you just
say three hundred total tonnage hey good
memory yes I did but remember there can
be anywhere from 14 to 22 tires on one
jumbo jet they're durable too
a plane can test the ground up to 500
times before it's tires will need to be
covered with a new layer of rubber but
what makes tire so tough is mostly nylon
cores under the tread and special
aluminum steel reinforcements then
there's the gas they have inside it's
not oxygen at very low temperatures
oxygen can turn into ice right inside
the tires of course the temperature must
be extreme for this to happen about
minus 360 degrees Fahrenheit but you
never know with air travel as for high
temperatures like during braking they
can trigger a reaction between oxygen
and rubber when those two mix the rubber
becomes weaker and nobody wants weak
airplane tires they can explode so
that's why the gas that fills aircraft
tires is nitrogen it doesn't react with
rubber which makes it a much safer
choice for airplanes
it also doesn't leak through the rubber
as fast as oxygen does meaning tires
that are filled with 95 percent oxygen
remain inflated a lot longer and it's
good news because in this case Wheels
need less maintenance which saves the
airline's money now the pressure in
airplane tires is six times bigger than
the pressure in your car's tires it's
200 psi which stands for 200 pounds per
square inch and that's what you'd feel
if you took a dive 450 feet underwater
or rather you wouldn't feel because the
maximum pressure a person can withstand
is only about 50 psi but if we speak
about airplane tires such high pressure
makes them strong it's next to
impossible to over plate a tire to the
point that it explodes now it's true
that over flay ting can reduce traction
and put more pressure on airplane wheels
but if a popped tire situation happens
it's mostly because of the thing being
under inflated even if it did happen on
your fly chances are you wouldn't even
notice remember there can be plenty of
wheels on large airplanes like an Airbus
a380 or Boeing 747 and if one of the
tires fails the plane will still land
safely now there's one more thing why
aircraft tires must be strong and
durable when a plane touches the ground
its tires aren't rolling at first
they're just skidding so in other words
the plane is dragging them along the
runway until it slows down enough for
the wheels to be able to rotate this is
when you can see the tire smoking after
the touchdown
at this moment they're accelerating to
catch up with the landing speed this
whole landing situation also led to
tires having grooves cut in them if they
had block patterns like the ones car
tires have these blocks would simply
fall off as soon as the plane wheels
touched the ground
the most serious tire wear happens
exactly when the rubber comes into
contact with the runway oh by the way
have you noticed how tiny and skinny
compared to the huge fuselage airplane
tires are don't worry they're just the
size they need to be larger tires would
be pointless since they wouldn't make
landing more effective or safer but they
would add extra weight and you probably
know that the heavier a plane is the
more fuel it uses and the more money an
airline loses so engineers try hard to
make wheels as small and at the same
time as safe as they can be after plane
tires are produced they always get
tested manufacturers create computer
simulations that check how tires will
behaved if they're pushed past their
speed limit or get overloaded they must
be able to withstand pressure that's
four times stronger than their usual one
and should cope with this situation for
at least three seconds as for the
strongest tires they shouldn't blow out
even at a landing speed of 280
miles-per-hour the same computer
programs figure out how tires will react
to standard landings takeoffs and even
taxing and then prototypes are created
and still airplane tires aren't entirely
safe from bursting accidents did happen
in the past and planes did skid off
runways because of one of the tires
exploding mid landing there were also
cases of tires bursting midair if it's
just an exploded tire there's nothing
too bad but tire fragments can get into
the engine or cause serious damage to
the fuselage thus when the incident
immediately becomes more dangerous
besides when a plane lands with one or
several damaged tires the load gets
uneven and it puts stress on the landing
gear in the worst case scenario all
tires even good ones might need
replacing after such an incident hmm you
can't argue that airplane wheels are
cool but sometimes they need additional
help I'm talking about
hydroplaning a situation that occurs
when the runway is covered with a layer
of water preventing a landing plane from
breaking or stopping in time the
aircraft just keeps skidding forward
unable to find traction the same can
happen to your car on a rainy day by the
way this way some airports have grooves
on the runway water flows into these
grooves making the surface not so
slippery and dropping the chances of
hydroplaning pilots claim that the
difference between grooved and non
grooved runways is dramatic and all that
sounds pretty groovy to me hey if you
learn something new today
then give the video a like and share it
with a friend
and here are some other videos I think
you'll enjoy just click to the left or
right and remember stay on the bright
side of life